# disc-treat_eco-evo-econ

**Repository:** Code for model simulations, base model parameters, and figures. 

**Abstract:** Mitigating negative downstream impacts of disease in domestic settings is difficult: treatment is often expensive, and frequent treatment can lead to resistance evolution. As a result, managers in some systems treat in discrete pulses once a pre-defined parasite burden is reached. This discrete treatment application might moderate evolutionary, ecological, and economic outcomes, but has been largely ignored by past work. We create a model which unifies past theoretical work while incorporating discrete, threshold based treatment and host movement patterns which mimic the sea lice-salmon system. We decompose treatment into treatment frequency and treatment efficacy, allowing us to better understand management trade-offs between evolutionary, ecological, and economic outcomes. We find that moderate treatment thresholds, similar to those currently used in many salmon aquaculture systems, lead to rapid resistance evolution, even in the presence of large refuge lice populations. Our model shows that economic and conservation win-wins are possible: there are treatment thresholds choices which lead to relatively high link population sizes and relatively low economic losses, especially when treatment is very effective or treatment is cheap. However, positive evolutionary outcomes are harder to capture, and occur more often when treatment efficacy is low. Capturing positive economic, evolutionary, and conservation outcomes might require management action beyond regulation of lice treatment threshold and minimum treatment efficacy.

**Figure captions, figures found in \schematic and \plots folders:**

Model schematic. Lice (yellow circles) move from the link environment to the farm environment via spillover ($\phi_{DL}$) from $F_S$ spawning adult hosts; Lice move from the domestic to the link environment via spillback ($\phi_{LD}$) onto $F_L$ juvenile salmon hosts. Lice move from the link environment to the wild environment and back via host migration. In addition to parasite movement between each environment, lice reproduce in the domestic and wild environments. In the domestic environment, treatment is applied when lice reach a pre-determined density ($M$); treatment kills some proportion of the lice given by the treatment efficacy ($\epsilon$).

Economic outcomes. Treatment threshold (x axis) and treatment efficacy (point color) affect economic outcomes following equation \ref{econ_calc} by determining the number of treatments and number of lice, on average, across a month long period following resistant parasite invasion. Economic costs (y axis) are resealed to be between 0 and 1 by dividing by the maximum economic cost calculated across all scenarios. Dashed light gray line gives cost of no treatment (i.e., maximum cost of lice burden). Panels show high (upper panel) and low (lower panel) cost of treatment.

Ecological outcomes. Treatment threshold (x axis) and treatment efficacy (point color) affect the number of juvenile hosts in the link environment by influencing the number of lice which move from the domestic to link environment. Link population size (y axis) is resealed to be between 0 and 1 by dividing by the maximum number of juvenile hosts in the link environment calculated  across all scenarios.

Evolutionary outcomes. Treatment threshold (x axis) and treatment efficacy (point color) affect evolutionary outcomes by determining the selection strength of parasite treatments. Light gray bars in all panels give the range of resistance proportions (y axis) for a given treatment threshold across tested treatment efficacy scenarios. Panels show base parameters (upper left), increased connectivity ($\phi_{LD} = \phi_{DL} = 0.15$, upper right), increased link population productivity ($r = 2.25$, lower left), and increased wild refuge population ($F_w = 12.5$, lower right).

Two-dimensional expenditure frontiers. Plots give pairwise expenditure frontiers, solid dark gray line, across all three outcomes of interest. Point color gives treatment efficacy, and dashed lines between points indicate shared treatment threshold to show relationships when holding either treatment efficacy or threshold constant.

Biological trade-offs of resistance. The cost of resistance ($\frac{l_r}{l_s}$, x axis) and benefit of resistance (selective difference, $\gamma$) determine the relative proportion of lice which are resistant at the end of a simulation, when treatment threshold and susceptible lice treatment efficacy is constant ($M = 0.7$ and $\epsilon_s = 0.7$, respectively).

Simulated outcomes from approximated sea-lice salmon aquaculture system (BC) parameter values. Varying treatment threshold (x axis) and treatment efficacy (point color) lead to similar patterns in outcomes as standardized parameters. Economic and ecological outcomes to be between 0 and 1 by dividing each output value by its maximum across all simulated scenarios; economic outcomes are less smooth compared to the standard parameter value case (Figure \ref{econ_outs}) because treatments are relatively infrequent in linear time in comparison. Parameters as listed in Table \ref{par_vals} under "Approximate values;" outputs are averaged over the final two months of the simulation following resistant lice invasion.


